why does the universe exist why is there
a word okay okay all right this is a
cosmic mystery be solemn why is there a
world why are we in it why is there
something rather than nothing at all I
mean this is the super ultimate why
question so I'm gonna talk about the
mystery of existence the puzzle of
existence where we are now in addressing
it and why you should care and I hope
you do care the philosopher art or
Schopenhauer said that those who don't
wonder about the contingency of their
existence of the contingency of the
world's existence are mentally deficient
all right that's a little harsh but but
still yeah so this has been called the
most sublime and awesome mystery the
deepest and most far-reaching question
man can pose its obsessed great thinkers
Ludvig Vidkun Stein perhaps the greatest
philosopher of the twentieth century was
astonished that there should be a world
at all he wrote into his Tractatus
proposition four point six six it is not
how things are in the world that is the
mystical it's that the world exists and
if you don't like taking your epigrams
from a philosopher try a scientist John
Archibald wheeler one of the great
physicists of the 20th century the
teacher of Richard Fineman the corner of
the term black hole he said I want to
know how come the quantum how come the
universe how come existence and my
friend Martin Ames whether I'll be doing
a lot of name-dropping in this talk so
get used to it my dear friend Martin
Amos once said that
once said that we're about five
Einsteins away from answering the
mystery of where the universe came from
and I no doubt they're five Einsteins in
the audience tonight the Einsteins show
of hands no no no I'm sorry so um the
who there's this question why is there
something rather than nothing this
Sablan question was posed rather late in
in intellectual history it was in
towards the end of the 17th century the
philosopher Leibniz who asked it very
smart guy Leibniz was a Co invented the
calculus independently of Isaac Newton
at about the same time but for Leibniz
who asked why is there something rather
than nothing this was not a great
mystery you know he either was or
pretended to be an Orthodox Christian
and his metaphysical outlook and he said
it's obvious why the world exists
because God created it and God created
indeed out of nothing at all that's how
powerful God is he doesn't need any
preexisting materials to fashion a world
out of he can make it out of sheer
nothingness creation ex nihilo and by
the way this is what most Americans
today believe there's no mystery of
existence for them God made it okay so
let's put this in an equation I don't
have any slides so I'm going to mine my
visuals so use your imaginations so it's
God plus nothing equals the world okay
now that's the equation and so maybe you
don't believe in God maybe you're a
scientific atheist or an unscientific
atheist and you don't believe in God and
you're not happy with it by the way even
if you even if you we have this equation
God plus nothing equals the world
there's already a problem why this God
exists you know God doesn't exist by
logic alone unless you believe the
ontological argument I hope you don't
because it's not a good argument so you
know it's conceived God were to exist he
might wonder you know I'm eternal I'm
all-powerful but where did I come from
and and whence then am i God speaks in a
more formal English and so
and so that you know one theory is that
God was so bored with pondering the
puzzle of his own existence that he
created the world you know just to
distract himself but anyways forget
about God so we have take out of the
equation we have blank plus nothing
equals the world now if you're a
Buddhist you might want to stop right
there because essentially you've got
what you've got is nothing equals the
world and by symmetry of identity that
means the world equals nothing okay and
to a Buddhist the world is just a whole
lot of nothing it's a big cosmic vacuity
and you know we think there's a lot of
something out there but that's because
we're enslaved by our desires
if we let large desires kind of melt
away we'll see the world for what it
truly is a vacuity nothingness and we'll
slip into this happy state of Nirvana
which has been defined as having just
enough life to enjoy being dead okay so
that's it that's the Buddhists like okay
but but I'm not I'm an I'm a westerner
and I'm still concerned with the puzzle
of existence so I've got say blank plus
it's gonna get serious in a minute so
blank plus nothing equals the world what
are we gonna put that blank
well how about science I mean science is
our best guide to the nature of reality
and the most fundamental science is
physics that tells us what naked reality
really is that that reveals what I call
tau foe to the true and ultimate
furniture of the universe so maybe
physics can fill this blank and indeed
since about you know 19 the late 1960s
around 1970 physicists have purported to
give a purely scientific explanation of
how a universe like ours could have
popped into existence out of sheer
nothingness a quantum fluctuation out of
the void Stephen Hawking is one of these
physicists were recently Alex Vilenkin
and the whole thing has been popularized
by another very fine physicist and
friend of mine Lawrence Krauss who wrote
a book called a universe from nothing
and Lawrence thinks that he's given a
piece of militant atheist by the way so
he's gotten God into the picture the
laws of quantum field theory the state
of the art physics can show how out of
sheer nothingness no space no time no
matter not
a little nugget of false vacuum can
fluctuate into existence and then by the
miracle of inflation blow up into this
huge and variegated cosmos we see around
us okay this is really it's an ingenious
scenario it's very speculative it's it's
fascinating but I've got a big problem
with it and the problem is this
it's a pseudo religious point of view
now Laurence thinks he's an atheist but
he's still in thrall to a religious
worldview he sees physical laws as being
like divine commands you know the laws
of quantum field theory for him are like
Fiat Lux let there be light the laws
have some sort of ontological power
cloud that they can call they can inform
the abyss that it's it's pregnant with
being they can call a world into
existence out of nothing but that's a
very primitive view of what the physical
law is right we know that physical laws
are actually generalized descriptions of
patterns and regularities in the world
they don't exist outside the world they
don't have any on to cloud of their own
they can't call a world into existence
out of nothingness that's a very
primitive view of what of what as a
scientific law is and if you don't
believe me on this you could listen to
Stephen Hawking who himself put forward
a model of the cosmos that was
self-contained didn't require any
outside cause any creator and after
proposing this Hawking admitted that he
was still puzzled I mean he said you
know these are just this models just
equations what breathes fired the into
the equations and creates the world for
them to describe he was puzzled by this
so equations themselves can't do the
magic can't resolve the puzzle of
existence and besides even if the laws
could do that why this set of laws why
quantum field theory that describes a
universe with a certain number of forces
and particles and so forth why not a
completely different set of laws there
are you know many many mathematically
consistent sets of laws why not no laws
at all why not sure nothingness so this
is a problem you know believe it or not
that reflective physicists really think
a lot about and at this point they tend
to go metaphysical say well maybe the
laws that describe our universe it's
just one set of laws and it describes
one part of reality but maybe every
consistent set of laws describes another
part of reality and in fact all possible
physical worlds really exist they're all
out there we just see a little tiny part
of reality that's described by the laws
of quantum field theory but there are
many many other worlds parts of reality
that are described by vastly different
theories that are different from ours in
ways we can't imagine that are you know
in conceivably exotic Stephen Weinberg
the father of the standard model of
particle physics is actually flirted
with this idea himself that all possible
realities actually exist also a younger
physicist max tegmark who believes that
that all mathematical structures exist
and mathematical existence is the same
thing as physical existence so we have
this vastly rich multiverse that
encompasses every logical possibility
now in taking this metaphysical way out
these physicists and also philosophers
are actually reaching back to a very old
idea that goes back to Plato it's the
principle of plentitude or fecundity or
into the great chain of being that that
reality is actually as full as possible
it's as far and move nothingness as it
could possibly be so we have these two
extremes now we have sheer nothingness
on one side and we have this vision of a
reality that encompasses every
conceivable world at the other extreme
the fullest possible reality nothingness
the simplest possible reality now what's
in between these two extremes there are
all kinds of intermediate realities that
include some things and leave out others
so one of these intermediate realities
is say the most the most elegant the
most mathematically elegant reality that
leaves out the inelegant bits the the
ugly asymmetries and so forth now
there's some physicists who will tell
you that we're actually living in the
most elegant reality I I think that
Brian Green is in the audience and he
has written a book called the
in universe he claims that the universe
we live in mathematically is very
elegant don't believe him
it's it's it's an ugly no it's a pious
hope I wish that were true but I think
the other day he admitted to me it's
really an ugly universe the the it's
stupidly constructed it's got way too
many arbitrary coupling constants and
mass ratios and superfluous families of
elementary particles and what the hell
is dark energy it's a it's a real it's a
stick and bubblegum can contraption it's
not an elegant universe and then that
then there's the best of all possible
worlds in an ethical sense now you
should get some now because in you know
a world in which sentient beings don't
suffer needlessly in which there aren't
things like like childhood cancer or the
Holocaust this is an ethical conception
anyway so between nothingness and the
fullest possible reality various special
realities nothingness is special it's
the simplest then there's the most
elegant possible reality that's special
the fullest possible reality that
special but what are we leaving out here
there's also just the crummy generic
realities that aren't special in any way
that are sort of random they're
infinitely removed from nothingness but
they fall infinitely short of complete
fullness they're a mixture of chaos and
order of mathematical elegance and an
ugliness that so they're you know I
would describe these realities as an
incomplete and infinite
mediocre incomplete mess a generic
reality a kind of cosmic junk shot and
these realities no is there a deity and
many of these realities maybe but the
deity isn't perfect like the
judeo-christian deity the deity isn't
all good and all-powerful it might be
instead 100% malevolent but only 80%
effective which which pretty much
describes the world we see around us I
think so
so I would like to propose that the
resolution to the mystery of existence
is that that our the reality we exist in
is one of these generic realities now
reality has to turn out some way it can
either turn out to be nothing or
everything or something in between so if
it has some special feature like being
really elegant or really full or really
simple like nothingness that would
require an explanation but if it's just
one of these random generic realities
there's no further explanation for it
and indeed I would say that's the
reality we live in that's what science
is telling us that's what at the
beginning of the week we got the
exciting information that the theory of
inflation which predicts a big infinite
kind of messy arbitrary pointless
reality it's like a big you know
frothing of
champagne coming out of a bottle
endlessly a vast universe mostly a
wasteland with a little pockets of charm
and order and peace you know that this
is this has been confirmed this
inflationary scenario by the
observations made by radio telescopes in
Antarctica that looked at the signature
of the gravitational waves from the just
before the Big Bang I'm sure you all
know about this so anyway I think
there's a little some evidence that this
really is the reality that we're stuck
with now why should you care well well
the the question why does the world
exist that's the causative question it's
sort of rhymes with a more intimate
question why do I exist why do you exist
you know our existence is really amazing
would seem to be amazingly improbable
because there you know there's something
like there's an enormous number of
genetically possible humans if you can
compute it by looking at the number of
genes and the number of alleles and so
forth and it's a back-of-the-envelope
calculation will tell you there about 10
to the 10,000 possible humans
genetically that's between a googol and
a googolplex so and the number of actual
humans have syste Dizz an infinite you
know 100 billion maybe 50 billion an
infinitesimal fraction so all of us
we've won this amazing cosmic lottery
we're here okay so what kind of reality
do we want to live in do we
live in a special reality what if we
were living in the most elegant possible
reality what imagine the existential
pressure on us to live up to that you
know to be elegant not to pull down the
tone of it or what if we were living in
the fullest possible reality well then
our existence would be guaranteed
because every possible thing exists in
that reality but our choices would be
meaningless you know if I if I really
struggle morally and agonize and I
decide to do the right thing what
difference does make because they're a
infinite number of versions of me also
doing the right thing and an infinite
number doing the wrong thing so my
choices are meaningless so we don't want
to live in that special reality and as
for the special reality of nothingness I
mean we wouldn't be having this
conversation so so okay so I think
living in a generic reality that's
mediocre
you know they're they're nasty bits a
nice fit so we can make the nice bits
bigger and the nasty bits smaller and
that gives us a kind of purpose in life
you know the universe is absurd but we
can still construct a purpose and that's
a pretty good one and then the overall
meaty mediocrity of reality could have
resonates cisely
with a mediocrity we all feel in the
core of our being and I know you feel it
I mean I know you all you're all special
but you're still kind of secretly
mediocre don't you think so anyway you
may you may say you know this puzzle of
mystery of existence it's just you know
silly mystery mongering you're not
astonished at the existence of the
universe you and you're in good company
you know Bertrand Russell said you know
I I should say the universe is just
there and that's all you know just a
brute fact and my professor at columbia
city morgue investor a great
philosophical wag when i said to him
professor morgan master why is there
something rather than nothing and he
said oh even if there was nothing you
still wouldn't be satisfied so yeah so
okay so you're not astonished you know I
don't care but I will tell you I'll tell
I will tell you something to conclude I
guarantee you will astonish you because
it's astonished all of the brilliant
wonderful people I've met at this TED
conference when I told them and it's
this never in my life have I had a cell
phone
thank you
[Applause]